David Papineau (born 1947) is a British academic philosopher, born in Como, Italy. He works as Professor of Philosophy of Science at King's College London and the City University of New York Graduate Center having previously taught for several years at Cambridge University where he was a fellow of Robinson College. He was born in Italy and grew up in Trinidad, England and South Africa. He currently lives in London with his wife, Rose Wild, and their two children Katy and Louis.


== Biography ==
Papineau received a BSc in mathematics from the University of Natal and a BA and PhD in philosophy from the University of Cambridge under the supervision of Ian Hacking.
Papineau has worked in metaphysics, epistemology, and the philosophies of science, mind, and mathematics. His overall stance is naturalist and realist. He is one of the originators of the teleosemantic theory of mental representation, a solution to the problem of intentionality which derives the intentional content of our beliefs from their biological purpose. He is also a defender of the a posteriori physicalist solution to the mind-body problem.
Papineau was elected President of the British Society for the Philosophy of Science for 19935, of the Mind Association for 200910 and of the Aristotelian Society for 2013-4.
His latest book Knowing the Score (2017) is written for a general readership and looks at a number of ways in which sporting issues cast light on long-standing philosophical problems.


== Publications ==
For Science in the Social Sciences (1978)
Theory and Meaning (1979)
Reality and Representation (1987)
Philosophical Naturalism (1993)
Introducing Consciousness (2000)
Thinking about Consciousness (2002)
The Roots of Reason: Philosophical Essays on Rationality, Evolution and Probability (2003)
Philosophical Devices (2012)
Knowing the Score (2017)


== References ==


== External links ==
His personal webpage
Podcast interview with David Papineau on Physicalism on Philosophy Bites
Interview with 3:AM Magazine