Spiegel Online (SPON) is one of the most widely read German-language news websites. It was founded in 1994 as the online offshoot of the German news magazine, Der Spiegel, with a staff of journalists working independently of the magazine. Today, Spiegel Online is the most frequently quoted online media product in Germany. Spiegel Online International, a section featuring articles translated into English, was launched in autumn 2004.


== Company and editorial staff ==
Spiegel Online is run by Spiegel Online GmbH, part of SPIEGELnet GmbH, itself a wholly owned subsidiary of SPIEGEL-Verlag. The editorial offices of Spiegel Online and Der Spiegel print magazine are separate operations, each with their own offices, authors, and content. Spiegel Online has a record of profitability. Regular staff includes 150 people in the Hamburg headquarters, complemented by freelancers, and domestic and international news bureaus. In the German capital, Berlin, 15 correspondents cover the German federal government, political parties, corporations and artists. The Munich and Dsseldorf offices have one correspondent each. There are journalists based in Washington, D.C., New York, London, Moscow, New Delhi and Istanbul. The online news staff also receives support from Der Spiegel magazines network of correspondents in Germany and abroad. The site also uses content from news agencies such as AFP, AP, dpa and Reuters.
Wolfgang Bchner was editor in chief of Spiegel and Spiegel Online from September 2013 to December 2014. Bchner's former deputies, Florian Harms and Barbara Hans, headed Spiegel Online after Bchner left the company. On January 13, 2015, Harms was appointed sole editor in chief.


== Online journalism pioneer ==
Spiegel Online first went up on 25 October 1994, making it the first online presence of an established news magazine, one day before the Time site. SPON started as a service on CompuServe. The web domain www.spiegel.de was established one year later. SPON's content initially consisted of hand-picked articles from the print magazine. As early as 1995, however, original content first appeared in a section called "Scanner," which was only available online. In the following year, Spiegel Online was relaunched and commenced featuring breaking news as well.


== See also ==
List of magazines in Germany


== References ==


== External links ==
Spiegel Online
Spiegel Online International