Nuclear blackmail is a form of nuclear strategy in which an aggressor uses the threat of use of nuclear weapons to force an adversary to perform some action or make some concessions. It is a type of extortion, related to brinkmanship.


== Effectiveness ==
Nuclear blackmail is considered most effective when the person making the threat is unhinged and ostensibly willing to commit suicide. (See game theory)
It is generally regarded as ineffective against a rational opponent who has or is an ally of someone who has assured destruction capability. If both states have nuclear weapons, the form of nuclear blackmail becomes a threat of escalation. In this situation if the opponent refuses to respond, then one's choices are either surrender or suicide. During the Cold War, the explicit threat of nuclear warfare to force an opponent to perform an action was rare in that most nations were allies of either the Soviet Union or the United States.


== History ==
In 1953, Eisenhower threatened the use of nuclear weapons to end the Korean War if the Chinese refused to negotiate.
The United States issued several nuclear threats against the People's Republic of China in the 1950s to force the evacuation of outlying islands and the cessation of attacks against Quemoy and Matsu, part of Republic of China.
Recently declassified documents from the National Archives (UK) indicate that the United Kingdom considered threatening China with nuclear retaliation in 1961 in the case of a military reclamation of Hong Kong by China.
Ali Magoudi, a psychoanalyst of French president Franois Mitterrand, claimed that Margaret Thatcher threatened nuclear war against Argentina during the 1982 Falklands War in order to procure codes from France to disable Argentina's French-made missiles. This claim has not been confirmed by either the French or British governments.
In 1981, the United States Department of Energy said there had been 75 cases of nuclear blackmail against the United States, though only several were serious attempts.


== In fiction ==
Nuclear blackmail, typically by a supervillain rather than a state, has been frequently employed as a plot device in spy fiction and action films. Since such a scheme appeared in the film Thunderball, the trope has been particularly associated with the James Bond series and in 24 (TV series). The notion of a supervillain threatening world leaders with a nuclear device has since become a clich, and has been parodied in Charles K. Feldman's Casino Royale, Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery, The Simpsons episode "You Only Move Twice", and other espionage spoofs.


== See also ==
Brinkmanship
Deterrence theory
Essentials of PostCold War Deterrence
Mutual assured destruction
Nuclear terrorism
Samson Option


== References ==